[Music]
there is a feature called eval which
would evaluate the string that was given
as if it's a command and it will be
passed on to the shell to execute
one warning never evaluate
a user supplied
string on any shell because such
features if they're available in any
script
will make the system vulnerable to
attacks because the user can supply
any arbitrary command and if it is if it
gets executed
and sometimes dangerously by a super
user permission then
anything can happen so it's a very good
security practice to not evaluate
any user supplied string as it is
with that warning you can go ahead and
see whether you can
construct commands
and then evaluate them on the shell
so sometimes there are some commands
which you would like to construct using
various string operations etc and
finally you have got a set of strings
then all those strings can be treated
as a single string and then getting
executed on the shell
using the eval command
and once it is over the control will be
given back to the shell which has
launched the eval command so here is a
very simple example
where we are taking two strings cmd and
fmt
and then i am just passing it on to eval
and see what happens
and you see that the date has been
printed so it is as good as sending
those two strings side by side to bash
and then getting the output so eval
actually sending those strings to the
shell and then printing them out
so the variation we have done is that we
are printing the process id of the
script
and also
what is
executing the
eval command for the date
output and before i proceed let me see
the
process id of the current shell it is
and then i have the eval example so you
see that the eval example
showing me that the
command has been executed by the shell
that was launched
separately
to run the script
and so which means that this was run in
the same shell
as
the
eval example dot sh script sometimes
it is useful to
have functions written in your script
so that certain specific actions are
taken care by respective functions
and you can reuse those functions by
keeping them in a particular script file
and then sourcing it in every script
that you would write so that standard
functions
are available in multiple scripts
and these can be things like writing an
error message or logging information to
a
log book providing help documentation
about the script etc
so here is an example of a
script which has some functions so what
we have is two functions one function
usage the function usage what it does is
it will take the argument that was
passed to it and tell
that the
script has to be used in a particular
format that is the name by which it has
been launched here you can see that i am
calling it
with the dollar zero which means what is
the name by which the script has been
called
and then it should be called with two
strings one after other so i am telling
a help
information on the screen
how the
script has to be launched
now there is another function which is
swapping so it is printing that
two variables that are passed in a
reverse order now you can see the dollar
one and dollar two do not correspond to
the arguments to the shell but arguments
to the call of the swap function the
same thing is applicable here dollar one
is the argument passed to the usage call
okay so here if you see
in case the script has been called with
less than two arguments then i am
printing the usage document and i'm
exiting and in case it has been called
with two arguments or more then i am
swapping the first and second arguments
so you can see here
the name of the script has been passed
to usage and there is a first argument
being sent to usage and therefore dollar
one corresponds to the dollar zero which
is basically the name of the
script that has been used for launching
so let us try this out
so i try without any
arguments so you can see that the usage
has been displayed and you can see that
the dollar one here is a dollar zero
which is basically the name of the
script
and it's quite nice because i don't have
to hard code that inside
okay and str1 fcr2 is what is here
saying that you have to use this
particular script with two strings as
arguments so let me also have arc one
and you see that the same output is
coming because it is having only one
argument and not two as expected
and if i give two arguments then it
would actually go ahead and do the
swapping and you are seeing the output
is having this reversed sequence of the
arguments that you have supplied so here
is an example where
some of the actions are packaged away in
functions and these can also be kept in
a separate file to source so let us see
that also now
so what i would do is a function example
i would say
my lib dot sh
and i go to my lib dot sh and i will
have
these functions that are kept in the
library so i have pushed the functions
into a
file which contains these
for sourcing so it's like my library
file and now i can make my script a
little bit
brief
by saying i want to source my lib dot sh
and therefore i don't need the function
definitions here so now they are
available and so the function
calls are all hidden away in a library
file and now i am just directly using
the
calls for
usage and swapping
and the script is now very brief which
is quite elegant
so let us go ahead and try this out
and so it works exactly what we have
intended
okay so you can see that this is a very
nice way by which you can
take away some of the
program codes and keep them as functions
and
store them in a library file and source
it in your script so that they are not
seen in the main script file
to keep your code elegant and also to
perhaps not touch the functions that are
well written
and therefore they don't have to be
disturbed when you are editing now as
you have seen that we can pass arguments
to shell scripts and it's a good idea to
have some of the arguments designed in
the way that linux commands are also
working so you can pass on some options
and then have a way by which those
options are processed in an automatical
fashion
now get ops is a feature available
within the bash so that this processing
of options passed to the script is done
in a very elegant manner
so for example in this script
you can call the script using the
options a b or c that is minus a minus b
and minus c
and if you are giving options like minus
b or minus c then they should have a
value after that so minus b
then b argument minus c and c argument
however minus a will not require any
argument so the colon following the
letter shows that that particular option
will have a value that is being expected
so some kind of a
argument is being expected for those
options
this is actually processed very
elegantly here saying that with a case
loop so if the options
are such that the b is option then
the argument that is supplied with the b
is then put in the variable called b arg
and it's the c option then the argument
that is applied is put in the c arc
and if it is a then you don't have to do
any of those and by default you can
actually tell the uch pattern of that
particular script and then close the
case loop and close the do loop so this
is a very neat way by which the options
are being processed and you don't have
to now
ah worry about which position the abc
options have come because the case loop
will take care of those kind of actions
so let us see this
usage in a script so that you can try
this out for any professionally written
script that you would like to do
shortly so here is a very simple
script that we have just now seen so we
are actually going to launch by giving
the options so let us give the options
as minus a
minus b then
b argument
minus c c argument okay and let us say
minus d minus e i am giving some extra
options
now what will happen is that
the case loop has worked and it is
accepting minus a minus b archive minus
c argument but it is also telling
something more which is very useful that
is it says that you have given an
illegal option because the options that
were actually accepted are abc as given
in the get ops so any other option is
then illegal so it is also helping you
to
reduce the amount of coding because you
don't now
need to search for any other
pattern and then throw some error so
these errors are thrown by get opts
which is very elegant
now let us
skip those and let us say the c option
is given without any argument so you see
that again there is a
requirement of an argument for the c
option and it is being alerted so which
means that again here the colon that is
after the c is doing the entire magic of
searching for an argument after the c
option
and if it is not there then it is
actually throwing an error okay
similarly i can actually say c argument
but i skip the b argument
and you see what happens what happens is
that
minus c is used as if it is argument for
minus b
after that rest of it is ignored and
therefore there are two options that are
actually active minus a and minus b so
minus c is actually
used as if it is argument
for b
now i would actually also be able to try
that out
for an error by skipping it so you can
see that there is nothing after b and
therefore
what is expected as an
argument for the b option is missing and
therefore there is an error okay i could
now also see that for c so the same
error will be shown okay now if i don't
give any of those there is no problem
because there are only options and
therefore there is no error so you can
see that the option
processing and
expecting an argument
and throwing errors if they are not
available as per requirement is all done
quite elegantly by using the get ops by
going through the getups documentation
and implementing that in your scripts
you can actually make your script quite
professional almost like any other linux
command now one last thing that we would
like to look at in the bash features is
to provide a menu
so let us say we have
a set of things that user has to pick up
and a menu is to be shown and the user
has to pick one of those that are shown
in the menu so this entire idea of
showing a set of options as a menu
and then checking for the user input
seeing if the user input is one of the
menu items that are listed
if it's not then throwing an error and
if it is matching then assigning that
particular value of the chosen menu to a
variable and then moving on so the
entire action can be captured by using a
select loop here is an example of a
select loop and let us go and explore
this by actually running it
and this is a
beautiful way by which a text menu can
be provided within the terminal
environment
this is quite elegant because the
construction of select loop
is quite simple like any other case loop
however there is a additional action
that is being performed namely whatever
you choose is being matched with what is
in the menu and then unless it matches
the loop is just continuing
so that the user input is sought
for only one of the listed menu items
and not anything else
so let us check that out how it works
so the select example that we have
chosen is same as what is in the slides
and we will run it now
and you see that i have
shown 10 numbers and i am asking
a number that is falling in the middle
of the range
so if i choose a 1
it says that i have picked a small one
small number if i choose 9 it says i
have picked up a big number if i choose
then it says that i have picked the
right one and then the variable that is
actually running
with that
select loop is given a value 5 and then
we are printing it out so you can see
the script here
select completed with dollar i so i is a
variable for the select loop and i has
been assigned a value 5
as you can see here okay the final
selection that is accepted is
used to assign the value of the variable
which is used for the select loop and
then we move on to the remaining part of
the code now let us try the same thing
with the options that actually not
listed so what happens when i give
options like for example i just give
some random string so you see that it
doesn't leave me okay i can't actually
leave
and i have to give options that are only
part of the menu
and i can give that
okay
and you see that it allows to finish
only when i
come out of the loop as per the script
and what is that
you can see here
i am able to come out of the loop using
break only when i choose either four or
five or six or seven otherwise i am not
coming out of the loop and that's what
happened here i
picked one and two and three the loop is
still continuing the moment i picked
four i am able to come out of the loop
so that's what has happened here okay so
you can use the break command to
indicate what is the value
or the pattern that you are looking for
within the menu
otherwise you can ask the
user to keep iterating
and you can also be sure that
if the user gives any input other than
what is actually listed
in these menu items then it will be
ignored okay so that way it is very
elegant
so you have now seen most of the
features that are required to create a
professional bash script
please make sure that you follow some
security features do not give set uid
permission to the scripts unless you
know what you are doing
and do not process user inputs to run
commands because they could contain some
malicious code check for
validity of the user input before you
use in your scripts
so that the
script would run without any error
and soon you can see that by packaging
some of these
actions as the library calls that are
kept in a separate file you can make a
very professional looking bash script
all by yourself and create new commands
for your own processing of textual
information on the linux operating
system
so enjoy exploring by actually trying
them out